---
title: Set-theoretic types for polymorphic variants
author: OlivierNicole (Olivier Nicole)
abstract: Wednesday 21st 1150-1215 AM (ICFP 2016)
---

In OCaml, union and intersection types are used to type polymorphic variants.
But sometimes, their typing can be inflexible or unintuitive. See type of:

```
let f = function `Apple -> `Pomme
  | `Cherry -> `Cerise
  | x -> x
```

OCaml encodes unions and subtyping via unification, which has some shortcomings.

Our solution is:
* Use uion, intersection, and negation types directly
* Goal: have type reconstruction as in OCaml

# Our language

A fragment of OCaml with polymorphic variants and pattern matching.

The type system of OCaml is based on structural polymorphism [Guarrigue 2002].
Variant types are encoded via constraints and unification. Constraints introduce
*bounded polymorphism*.

We can get ill-typed programs:

```
let id = fun x -> match x with `A | `B -> x
[(id `A);`B] (* ill-typed! *)
```

We cannot express substraction of a type in the current OCaml system.

# Our approach

Opposite approach with respect to structural polymorphism: use rich types and
subtyping.

# Types

Types are coinductively generated by:
```
t ::= 'a | int | bool | c | t -> t | t × t | `tag(t) | t v t | not t | Empty
```

# Type rules

Most rules are as in ML plus, the *subsumption rule* (see paper).

NB: no rule for intersection introduction.

With our way of encoding bounded polymorphism, we do not need constraints to
introduce bounds.

# Patterns with set-theoretic types

Type connectives let us express exact types for patterns

# Reconstruction: constraint solving

To solve subtyping constraints we use the tallying algorithm of CDuce [Castagna
et al '15].

# Results

Our set-theoretic type system is:
* complete
* more expressive
* features full-fledged union types and intersections & negations.

The reconstruction algorithm is both sound and complete.

Our system doesn't work with principal types though. But it allows completeness
of reconstruction.

# Future work

* Attempt to define a notion of principality
* allow intersections of arrows for functions.
* consider other features of OCaml such as GADTs.
